# AMWA BCP-xxx-01: NMOS Receiver Capabilities \[Work In Progress\]

In [IS-04][], a Receiver resource expresses the capabilities of a Receiver through attributes that identify constraints on streams of compatible Senders.

Receivers indicate their `transport` and `format`. These attributes express constraints that can be evaluated against the related attributes of a Sender and its Flow.

The Receiver `caps` object is provided as an extensible mechanism to define finer-grained constraints.

IS-04 itself defines `caps` attributes for `media_types` (since v1.1) and, for data Receivers, also  `event_types` (since v1.3). Both these attributes express constraints that can be evaluated against Flow attributes, as arrays whose elements define the alternatives that are acceptable. In each case, the constraint is satisfied when the target Flow attribute matches **any of** the enumerated alternatives.

When `caps` contains multiple attributes, i.e. both `media_types` and `event_types`, the Receiver indicates that it only accepts streams that satisfy **all of** (both!) the constraints.

This specification defines a new `constraint_sets` attribute for the Receiver `caps` object, which can also be combined with the existing ones. In common with the existing attributes, its value is an array of alternatives; this constraint is satisfied when **any of** its enumerated Constraint Sets are satisfied.

This specification defines a generic JSON syntax to express Constraint Sets made up of individual Parameter Constraints. The Constraint Set is satisfied if **all of** its Parameter Constraints are satisfied.

The representation of individual Parameter Constraints is consistent with the mechanism defined by [IS-05][] to constrain Sender and Receiver transport parameters at the **/constraints** endpoints, which Nodes and Controllers may also support.

The `constraints_set` attribute is listed in the Capabilities parameter register in [NMOS Parameter Registers][].

## Use of Normative Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119][RFC-2119].

## Defining Parameter Constraints

A specification for each Parameter Constraint MUST be listed in the Capabilities register in the [NMOS Parameter Registers][]. Each specification defines a unique identifier, the constraint type, and the target parameter, as follows.

### Parameter Constraint Identifiers

Each Parameter Constraint is given a unique identifier - a URN. Parameter Constraints defined by the AMWA have the form:
```
urn:x-nmos:cap:<category>:<constraint>
```

Two `<category>` names are initially defined, `format` for media-related constraints, and `transport` for transport-related constraints.

For example, `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate` is a Parameter Constraint relating to the Grain rate of the stream, for example by targeting the  `grain_rate` attribute of an IS-04 Flow. (The concept of Grains is defined in the [JT-NM Reference Architecture][].)

The `<category>` name `meta` is reserved for [metadata related to Constraint Sets](#constraint-set-metadata). These attributes are not constraints themselves.

### Parameter Constraint Types

The specification defines the JSON value type to which the constraint relates, which MUST be one of:
  * `string`
  * `integer`
  * `number`
  * `boolean`
  * `rational`
    * as per IS-04, a JSON object with an integer `numerator` and optional integer `denominator` (default: 1)

The type of the constraint defines which [Constraint Keywords](#constraint-keywords) are allowed when the Parameter Constraint is instantiated.

### Parameter Constraint Target

The specification defines the target parameter against which the constraint is to be evaluated, for example, the specific IS-04 Flow attribute or [SDP][] format-specific parameter.

Especially in the case of parameters carried in non-JSON formats, such as a transport file, the specification MUST also describe how to map the parameter value to one of the [supported JSON types](#parameter-constraint-types).

## Instantiating Parameter Constraints

The Receiver expresses its capabilities with respect to a particular Parameter Constraint by including the constraint's unique identifier as an attribute in a [Constraint Set](#constraint-sets) with an object value, the attributes of which depend on the [specified type](#parameter-constraint-types).

For example:

```json
"urn:x-nmos:cap:format:bit_depth": {
  "type": "integer",
  "enum": [ 24, 20, 16 ]
}
```

## Constraint Keywords

Each Parameter Constraint is instantiated as an object with one or more attributes, that are type-specific Constraint Keywords defining how the parameter is constrained.

The Parameter Constraint is satisfied if **all of** the constraints expressed by the Constraint Keywords are satisfied.

### Common Constraint Keywords

The following attributes are allowed for all constraint types:
* `type`, indicating the [specified type](#parameter-constraint-types) as a string value
* `enum` as an array value with one or more elements of the specified type
* (TBC) any means to indicate whether `null` or missing is acceptable?

### String Constraint Keywords

The following attribute is additionally allowed for `string` constraints:

* (TBC) `pattern`, a string value that is a regex pattern

### Integer and Number Constraint Keywords

The following attributes are additionally allowed for `integer` and `number` constraints:

* `minimum`, inclusive minimum, an integer or number as appropriate
* `maximum`, inclusive maximum, an integer or number as appropriate

### Boolean Constraint Keywords

Nothing additional

### Rational Constraint Keywords

The following attributes are additionally allowed for `rational` constraints:

* `minimum`, inclusive minimum, a `rational` value
* `maximum`, inclusive maximum, a `rational` value

## Constraint Sets

Constraint Sets are instantiated with one or more Parameter Constraints. The Constraint Set is satisfied if **all of** its Parameter Constraints are satisfied.

The Constraint Set is represented as a JSON object whose attributes are the Parameter Constraints.

The Receiver advertises a list of Constraint Sets as a JSON array of these objects, using the key `constraint_sets` in the `caps` object.

A [worked example](#worked-example) is given below.

(TBC) Should we permit Parameter Constraints that would be identical in all Constraint Sets to be instantiated as top-level `caps` attributes instead?

### Constraint Set Metadata

Additional metadata about each Constraint Set may be included using attributes listed in the Capabilities register in the [NMOS Parameter Registers][] with the following unique identifiers:
```
urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:<attribute>
```

For example, `urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:label` may be used to provide a human-readable name for the Constraint Set as a simple string value.

The identifier `urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:quality` enables the Receiver to indicate the relative quality of its listed Constraint Sets.

...

## Validating Parameter Constraints and Constraint Sets

This specification includes a JSON Schema for each [Parameter Constraint Type](#parameter-constraint-type) and for Constraint Sets and the `constraint_sets` attribute as a whole, in the [APIs/schemas](/APIs/schemas) directory.

## Behaviour: Receivers

Receivers SHOULD express their capabilities as precisely as possible. However, this specification may not be sufficiently expressive to indicate every type of stream that a Receiver can or cannot consume successfully. It is entirely possible that a Receiver may fail to consume a stream even if the Receiver's advertised Constraint Sets indicate that it can.

The value of the `constraint_sets` attribute MUST be valid according to this specification. The value of all the Constraint Set attributes MUST be valid according to the relevant specification in the Capabilities register in the [NMOS Parameter Registers][].

The capabilities of a Receiver could change over its lifetime, for example, as a result of reconfiguration by some other means. The Receiver MUST reflect any change in its capabilities by updating the `caps` object as appropriate and [modifying the `version` attribute, as per IS-04](https://amwa-tv.github.io/nmos-discovery-registration/tags/v1.3/docs/2.1._APIs_-_Common_Keys.html#version).

...

## Behaviour: Controllers

Controllers MAY validate a Receiver's `constraint_sets` against the JSON schema included in this specification, before evaluating the Constraint Sets. Controllers MAY ignore the entire `constraint_sets` value if it does not match the schema.

Controllers MAY ignore individual Parameter Constraints whose unique identifiers they do not recognize.

Controllers SHOULD support a basic set of Parameter Constraints, including:

* `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:media_type`
* `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width`
* `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height`
* `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate`
* `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:channels`
* `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:sample_rate`

Controllers SHOULD provide an indication to a user whether a Sender satisfies a Constraint Set of a Receiver, for example in a cross-point matrix view. Controllers MAY allow a user to attempt to make a connection whether the `constraint_sets` are satisfied or not.
 
...

## Worked Examples

### HD Video Receiver

A Receiver of ST 2110-20 1080i or 1080p Video with limited support for various frame rates (see [examples/receiver-video-1080.json](/examples/receiver-video-1080.json) for the complete Receiver resource):

```json
{
  ...
  "transport": "urn:x-nmos:transport:rtp",
  "format": "urn:x-nmos:format:video",
  "caps": {
    "media_types": [ "video/raw" ],
    "constraint_sets": [
      {
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:label": "1080i",
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:color_sampling": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": [ "YCbCr-4:2:2" ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height": {
          "type": "integer",
          "enum": [ 1080 ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width": {
          "type": "integer",
          "enum": [ 1920 ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate": {
          "type": "rational",
          "enum": [
             { "numerator": 25 },
             { "numerator": 30000, "denominator": 1001 }
           ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:interlace_mode": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": [
            "interlaced_tff",
            "interlaced_bff",
            "interlaced_psf"
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:label": "1080p",
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:color_sampling": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": [ "YCbCr-4:2:2" ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height": {
          "type": "integer",
          "enum": [ 1080 ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width": {
          "type": "integer",
          "enum": [ 1920 ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate": {
          "type": "rational",
          "enum": [
             { "numerator": 25 },
             { "numerator": 30000, "denominator": 1001 },
             { "numerator": 50 },
             { "numerator": 60000, "denominator": 1001 }
           ]
        },
        "urn:x-nmos:cap:format:interlace_mode": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": [ "progressive" ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

[IS-04]: https://amwa-tv.github.io/nmos-discovery-registration/ "AMWA IS-04 NMOS Discovery and Registration Specification"

[IS-05]: https://amwa-tv.github.io/nmos-device-connection-management/ "AMWA IS-05 NMOS Device Connection Management Specification"

[JT-NM Reference Architecture]: https://jt-nm.org/RA-1.0/ "JT-NM Reference Architecture (RA) v1.0"

[NMOS Parameter Registers]: https://amwa-tv.github.io/nmos-parameter-registers "Common parameter values for AMWA NMOS Specifications"

[RFC-2119]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119 "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels"

[SDP]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4566 "SDP: Session Description Protocol"

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9ucyI6eyJPOFBFSnFYRGU4MVNPOXViIjp7In
RleHQiOiJUaGUgaWRlbnRpZmllciBgdXJuOngtbm1vczpjYXA6
bWV0YTpxdWFsaXR5YCBlbmFibGVzIHRoZSBSZWNlaXZlciB0by
BpbmRpY2F0ZSB04oCmIiwic3RhcnQiOjY5ODIsImVuZCI6NzEx
MX0sIm5JN3RJb2pGdkJkdkVwSEciOnsidGV4dCI6Ik1BWSIsIn
N0YXJ0Ijo4NzI4LCJlbmQiOjg3MzF9LCJOYUhXV3ZmVFJIdzFQ
RExmIjp7InRleHQiOiJDb250cm9sbGVycyBTSE9VTEQgc3VwcG
9ydCBhIGJhc2ljIHNldCBvZiBQYXJhbWV0ZXIgQ29uc3RyYWlu
dHMiLCJzdGFydCI6ODgyMSwiZW5kIjo4ODg0fX0sImNvbW1lbn
RzIjp7IlFaZXczejRpbnFLVE5qdmciOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklk
IjoiTzhQRUpxWERlODFTTzl1YiIsInN1YiI6ImdoOjMxNzYxMT
U4IiwidGV4dCI6Ik9wZW4gZGlzY3Vzc2lvbiBhYm91dCB0aGUg
Zm9ybSB0aGlzIHNob3VsZCB0YWtlLCBhbmQgdGhlIG5hbWluZy
wgZS5nLiBgcHJpYCwgYHByZWZgIG9yIGBxdWFsaXR5YC4iLCJj
cmVhdGVkIjoxNjAzNTU5NDcxMzQ5fSwiTUM1RXFyOEp5SVNvWX
ZOUCI6eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9uSWQiOiJuSTd0SW9qRnZCZHZFcEhH
Iiwic3ViIjoiZ2g6MzE3NjExNTgiLCJ0ZXh0IjoiT3IgU0hPVU
xEPyIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDM1NTk3NTA4MTV9LCJQSnc3MEc0
WkdTbXNpbVQ1Ijp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZCI6Ik5hSFdXdmZUUk
h3MVBETGYiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDozMTc2MTE1OCIsInRleHQiOiJX
aXRob3V0IHRoaXMgc3RhdGVtZW50LCBDb250cm9sbGVycyBjYW
4gY2xhaW0gY29tcGxpYW5jZSB3aXRoIHRoaXMgc3BlYyB3aXRo
b3V0IGRvaW5nIGFueXRoaW5nPyIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDM1NT
k5MzU4NDV9fSwiaGlzdG9yeSI6WzMxMTc2Mjc4NCwtMTg3MzA4
Njg5LDcxNTc4OTAzNywyMDY3MjA1NzgxLDE4MDA5MDY3NTksMT
Y0MjIzNTQwLDUxMTUyNTQ4LC0xNDI1MzAxNDUyLDIwOTA4NDAy
NDYsLTE1NDQyNzc3MSwyNDgzMTQzODAsLTEzODU5Nzg3LC0xMD
MwNjYxMTQyLDg2MTc1NzYyMSwtMTU2MTY3NDM0MywtMTM3OTU5
NzQ1MywxOTkxMjY2NDUwLC01MDQwMjY2NzcsNDE2MDU0MDg2LD
E5MDc3OTQwNjldfQ==
-->